README.md, before:

# k3s-setup

## What is it good for?

This project will make it very easy to automatically setup a K3s based Kubernetes environment on your local development machine with metrics, certificate manager, ingress controller and dashboard.

It supports native Linux and also a WSL2 based setup.
There is no more need to use Docker for Desktop on Windows which makes it ideal for Corporate environments to save of license costs.

The setup was tested for following environments:

- Ubuntu Linux 22.04
- Debian 11
- Ubuntu Linux 22.04 for WSL2 (MS Windows 10 / 11)
- Debian 11 for WSL2 (MS Windows 10 / 11)

## How to start? (TL;DR)

### Requirements

- Make sure your Linux or WSL2 environment has access to the Internet (directly or via properly configured HTTP/HTTPS proxy)
- Your WSL2 distro must have [systemd support](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/commandline/systemd-support-is-now-available-in-wsl/#set-the-systemd-flag-set-in-your-wsl-distro-settings) enabled
- Make sure you have `sudo` permissions
- You need to have `curl` and [helm installed](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) in your Linux environment

### Really.. I want to start it now

```bash
git clone https://github.com/groundhog2k/k3s-setup.git
cd k3s-setup
./k3s-setup.sh
```

Install the self-signed root certificate that was generated in `./cluster-system/cert-manager/certs/tls.crt` into your local browser or computer truststore for root certificates.

When setup is finished and all services are running open [https://k8sdash](https://k8sdash) in your browser and enjoy Kubernetes.

**Important - For Windows only:**

Edit the hosts file (typically in [`C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts`](C:/Windows/system32/drivers/etc/hosts)) and add a mapping line for the hostname k8sdash:

```text
127.0.0.1 k8sdash
```

To configure the correct KUBECONFIG in Linux/WSL2 do:

```bash
export KUBECONFIG=~/.kube/k3s.yaml
```

## How to stop or (re)-start?

You can stop the installed k3s with:

```bash
k3s-killall.sh
```

...and start it again with:

```bash
sudo service k3s start
```

## How to uninstall?

Uninstall everything related to k3s with a simple:

```bash
k3s-uninstall.sh
```

If you want to uninstall nginx too (WSL2 only):

```bash
sudo apt remove nginx
```

---

## Give me the details

### For Linux

For Linux it will simply install K3s and prepare a few more services like, metrics server, Jetstack certificate manager, Ingress nginx and Kubernetes dashboard.

### Inside WSL2

In WSL2 it will spin up K3s inside the WSL environment, deploy the same services like on the Linux environment and expose the Ingress nginx HTTPS port (443) to the host machine using Nginx as a reverse proxy.

### All the scripts in detail

The script `k3s-setup.sh` builds the bracket around a few other scripts.
It will call the following sub-scripts:

1. `k3s/prepare-k3s.sh`

    K3s is using the crictl tool and containerd as runtime. `crictl` has a default [search order](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools/blob/master/docs/crictl.md) for container runtimes which is not optimal.
    At first it will copy the `crictl.yaml` to `/etc` to point the default search to containerd.

    In a second step it downloads and spins up K3s WITHOUT helm controller, treafik and metrics-server to create a really clean K8s environment (similar to vanilla Kubernetes).

2. `cluster-system/cluster-setup.sh`

   This sub-script creates a namespace `cluster-system`. All following custom cluster-wide components will be deployed to this namespace via helm charts.

   1. `cluster-system/metrics-server/install.sh`

      Installs the Kubernetes metrics-server from the [original helm chart](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server).

   2. `cluster-system/cert-manager/install.sh`

      The script generates a self-signed root certificate (if not already existend in the [`certs`](https://github.com/groundhog2k/k3s-setup/tree/main/cluster-system/cert-manager/certs) folder) and deploys this together with the [Jetstack cert-manager](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager).

   3. `cluster-system/ingress-nginx/install.sh`

      Deploys the [Ingress-nginx](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx) service as Kubernetes Ingress Controller.

   4. `cluster-system/k8s-dashboard/install.sh`

      This scripts deploys the [Kubernetes dashboard](https://github.com/kubernetes/dashboard) management UI from the original helm chart.

      Together with the Ingress component from previous step the UI should appear for the local URI [https://k8sdash](https://k8sdash)

      **Important:**

      **Install the self-signed root certificate into your local browser or computer truststore for root certificates.**

3. `nginx/prepare-nginx`

   This script will only be executed when the setup was started in context of WSL2 (Windows).
   It installs an nginx in WSL2 as Linux daemon and configures it to forward all incoming TCP traffic on Port 443 to the Ingress controller endpoint.

   **Attention:**

   **Be aware that this will overwrite a possible existing `/etc/nginx.conf` in your WSL2.**

Commit message:

Modify k3s setup to use external Traefik
Modify `k3s-setup.sh` to remove nginx installation and add Traefik check and configuration.

* **k3s-setup.sh**
  - Remove the section that installs nginx as a reverse proxy.
  - Add a section to check if Traefik is running on the Windows host.
  - Add a section to log the version of the install and ask the user whether to continue.
  - Add a section to configure K3s to use external Traefik once it is available.

* **k3s/prepare-k3s.sh**
  - Modify the K3s installation command to not install Traefik.
  - Add a section to configure K3s to use external Traefik once it is available.

* **README.md**
  - Update the documentation to reflect the changes made to the script.
  - Remove the section about installing nginx as a reverse proxy.
  - Add a section about using external Traefik on the Windows host.

---

For more details, open the [Copilot Workspace session](https://copilot-workspace.githubnext.com/SPRIME01/modded-k3s-setup?shareId=XXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXX).

README.md, after:

# k3s-setup

## What is it good for?

This project will make it very easy to automatically setup a K3s based Kubernetes environment on your local development machine with metrics, certificate manager, ingress controller and dashboard.

It supports native Linux and also a WSL2 based setup.
There is no more need to use Docker for Desktop on Windows which makes it ideal for Corporate environments to save of license costs.

The setup was tested for following environments:

- Ubuntu Linux 22.04
- Debian 11
- Ubuntu Linux 22.04 for WSL2 (MS Windows 10 / 11)
- Debian 11 for WSL2 (MS Windows 10 / 11)

## How to start? (TL;DR)

### Requirements

- Make sure your Linux or WSL2 environment has access to the Internet (directly or via properly configured HTTP/HTTPS proxy)
- Your WSL2 distro must have [systemd support](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/commandline/systemd-support-is-now-available-in-wsl/#set-the-systemd-flag-set-in-your-wsl-distro-settings) enabled
- Make sure you have `sudo` permissions
- You need to have `curl` and [helm installed](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) in your Linux environment

### Really.. I want to start it now

```bash
git clone https://github.com/groundhog2k/k3s-setup.git
cd k3s-setup
./k3s-setup.sh
```

Install the self-signed root certificate that was generated in `./cluster-system/cert-manager/certs/tls.crt` into your local browser or computer truststore for root certificates.

When setup is finished and all services are running open [https://k8sdash](https://k8sdash) in your browser and enjoy Kubernetes.

**Important - For Windows only:**

Edit the hosts file (typically in [`C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts`](C:/Windows/system32/drivers/etc/hosts)) and add a mapping line for the hostname k8sdash:

```text
127.0.0.1 k8sdash
```

To configure the correct KUBECONFIG in Linux/WSL2 do:

```bash
export KUBECONFIG=~/.kube/k3s.yaml
```

## How to stop or (re)-start?

You can stop the installed k3s with:

```bash
k3s-killall.sh
```

...and start it again with:

```bash
sudo service k3s start
```

## How to uninstall?

Uninstall everything related to k3s with a simple:

```bash
k3s-uninstall.sh
```

---

## Give me the details

### For Linux

For Linux it will simply install K3s and prepare a few more services like, metrics server, Jetstack certificate manager, Ingress nginx and Kubernetes dashboard.

### Inside WSL2

In WSL2 it will spin up K3s inside the WSL environment, deploy the same services like on the Linux environment and configure K3s to use external Traefik on the Windows host.

### All the scripts in detail

The script `k3s-setup.sh` builds the bracket around a few other scripts.
It will call the following sub-scripts:

1. `k3s/prepare-k3s.sh`

    K3s is using the crictl tool and containerd as runtime. `crictl` has a default [search order](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools/blob/master/docs/crictl.md) for container runtimes which is not optimal.
    At first it will copy the `crictl.yaml` to `/etc` to point the default search to containerd.

    In a second step it downloads and spins up K3s WITHOUT helm controller, treafik and metrics-server to create a really clean K8s environment (similar to vanilla Kubernetes).

2. `cluster-system/cluster-setup.sh`

   This sub-script creates a namespace `cluster-system`. All following custom cluster-wide components will be deployed to this namespace via helm charts.

   1. `cluster-system/metrics-server/install.sh`

      Installs the Kubernetes metrics-server from the [original helm chart](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server).

   2. `cluster-system/cert-manager/install.sh`

      The script generates a self-signed root certificate (if not already existend in the [`certs`](https://github.com/groundhog2k/k3s-setup/tree/main/cluster-system/cert-manager/certs) folder) and deploys this together with the [Jetstack cert-manager](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager).

   3. `cluster-system/ingress-nginx/install.sh`

      Deploys the [Ingress-nginx](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx) service as Kubernetes Ingress Controller.

   4. `cluster-system/k8s-dashboard/install.sh`

      This scripts deploys the [Kubernetes dashboard](https://github.com/kubernetes/dashboard) management UI from the original helm chart.

      Together with the Ingress component from previous step the UI should appear for the local URI [https://k8sdash](https://k8sdash)

      **Important:**

      **Install the self-signed root certificate into your local browser or computer truststore for root certificates.**

3. `k3s-setup.sh`

   This script will check if Traefik is running on the Windows host. If it is running, K3s will be configured to use external Traefik. If it is not running, K3s will be configured to use external Traefik once it is available.

   **Attention:**

   **Be aware that this will overwrite a possible existing `/etc/nginx.conf` in your WSL2.**
